# Partitioning

>> Topics discussed: splitting, indexing, rebalancing, routing

See [[Partitioning]].

## Summary

Partitioning is applied when single node can **no longer store all the data** or **handle all the load**. 

The goal of partitioning is to **split the large dataset** into smaller subsets, avoiding [[Hot spot|hot spots]]. To do it, appropriate partitioning scheme must be used.

**Partitioning Approaches**:
- **key-range** partitioning - effecient **range queries** (keys are sorted). [[Hot spot|Hot spots]] may arise when adjacent keys are highly accessed. Ususally **automatically rebalanced** (dynamic partitioning) by partitions split;
- **hash** partitioning - hashes of keys are used. Evenly **distributed data and load**.  **No range queries** can run effectively. For **rebalancing** ususally **fixed number of partitions** is set from the outset; **dynamic partitioning** may be used as well;
- hybrid with usage of **compound primary key** - part of key split data by partitions, another used for within-partition keys ordering.

**Secondary indexes**:
- **document-partitioned** (local index) - each **partition** maintains it's **own secondary index**. On write **single partition is updated**. On **read scatter-gather** approach is used;
- **term-partitioned** (global index) - secondary index is partitioned **separately from the main data**, but usually stored on the same nodes. **On read, single partition** is searched. **On write, multiple nodes** must accept updates.



